---
permalink: /blog/2010/04/18/nitle-2010-medieval-slavic-wiki-meets-project-bamboo/
title: "NITLE 2010: Medieval Slavic wiki meets Project Bamboo"
date: 2010-04-18
classes: wide
show_date: true
---
<p>For the NITLE Summit 2010 poster session, I combined my <a href="http://www.medievalslavic.com">Medieval Slavic wiki</a> with the work I've been doing as part of <a href="http://www.projectbamboo.org">Project Bamboo</a>. The abstract is below:<br />
 Even in a time when digital information can be accessed, searched, and filtered quickly, a number of academic disciplines rely heavily on print-only reference works and associated articles, many of which are not available on-line. Pulling together various scholars' assessment of any topic is painstaking work, taking up time that could be better spent on analysis. At the same time, article summaries are a common class assignment, but the students' work may never be seen by anyone other than the instructor. What if we could reduce the amount of scut work necessary for scholars, while making student assignments more meaningful?</p>
<p>Medievalslavic.org is designed to be a working model of what such a system might look like. Using the Mediawiki platform, I am in the process of dissecting commonly-used reference works in medieval Slavic studies into cross-linked articles, and incorporating dissenting views, supporting evidence, and other insights fromWikifying Reference subsequent scholarly articles. Heavy page-level citation of the sources, just as one would find in a scholarly article, both ensures that all the information can be verified, and allows the scholar to cite the source--rather than the wiki--to avoid criticism from traditionally-minded colleagues. I also plan to illustrate how this project aligns with the future directions for digital scholarship mentioned during the Project Bamboo workshops, with the hope that someone in a larger field might be interested in trying something similar with a class of current students.</p>
